RHEINISCHE
FRIEDRICH-WILHELMSUNIVERSITÄT BONN
INSTITUT FÜR
INFORMATIK DER
UNIVERSITÄT BONN
Institut für Informatik
Abteilung 1
Prof. Dr. Petra Mutzel
Laura Bülte
Michael Kaibel
Charlotte Bockhorst
Exercises for
Algorithms for Data Analysis
WS 2025/26
Exercise Sheet 8
Discussion:
CW 51
Exercise 8.1 – ILP problem formulations (4 Points)
An integer linear program (ILP) is a linear program with the additional constraint that x ∈ Z
n
. Give an ILP
formulation for each of the following problems:
a) Traveling Salesperson: Let G = (V,E) be a complete undirected graph and let d : E → R
+
0
be a
distance function. Find a travelling salesperson tour, i.e., a cycle in G that visits each vertex exactly
once and has minimal length with respect to d. (2p)
b) Vertex Cover: Given an undirected graph G = (V,E), find a minimal subset V
′ ⊂ V such that every
edge has one endpoint in V
′
. (1p)
c) Bin Backing: Given are an arbitrary number of boxes of size K and n items with sizes wi ≤ K,
i ∈ {1,...,n}. What is the minimum number of boxes needed to fit all the items? (1p)
Exercise 8.2 – Minimums spanning tree formulation (2 Points)
Can we change the first ILP formulation for MST presented in the lecture (slide 18) if all weights are strictly
positive (w(e) > 0)? Do we lose generality if we only consider instances with strictly positive weights?
Exercise 8.3 – ILP vs LP Relaxation (4 Points)
Show that, in general, the distance between an optimal solution of an ILP and its relaxation (i.e. the
same formulation with continuous variables instead of integer ones) might not be upper bounded. Here the
distance is defined as |OPTrelaxation − OPTILP|.
For this, give an example of an ILP with two variables x1,x2, where the objective is to maximize 1 · x2 and
the distance is arbitrarily large.
Exercise 8.4 – Logic operators as linear constraints (4 Points)
Model the following logical statements as linear constraints, where x, y, z ∈ {0, 1}:
a) z = x ∧ y (AND) (1p)
b) z = x ∨ y (OR) (1p)
c) z = x ⊕ y (XOR) (2p)
Page 1 of 2
Exercise 8.5 – Sudoku formulation (6 Points)
In this exercise we want to consider formulations for the Sudoku problem. Sudoku is a game where you
are given a field of 9x9 small squares, partitioned into 3x3 big squares (each containing 3x3 small squares).
You then have to fill each of the small squares with a digit 1-9 such that every row, column and big square
contains every digit exactly once.
a) Assume you are given an empty Sudoku template (a field of 9x9 squares). Formulate linear constraints
that model the Sudoku problem. (2p)
b) If you play the game, you are usually given some small squares with fixed digits to start from. Adjust
your formulation to include the input of such a partial solution. (2p)
c) Let’s now consider a variant of Sudoku where the numbers in adjacent squares have to differ by more
than one, i.e., you cannot have consecutive digits in neighboring squares. Again, formulate linear
constraints modelling this. (2p)
Page 2 of 2