RHEINISCHE
FRIEDRICH-WILHELMSUNIVERSITÄT BONN
INSTITUT FÜR
INFORMATIK DER
UNIVERSITÄT BONN
Institut für Informatik
Abteilung 1
Prof. Dr. Petra Mutzel
Laura Bülte
Michael Kaibel
Charlotte Bockhorst
Exercises for
Algorithms for Data Analysis
WS 2025/26
Exercise Sheet 7
Discussion:
CW 50
Exercise 7.1 – Properties of graph edit paths and costs (5 Points)
a) Let G and H be to labeled graphs with |V (G)| ≤ |V (H)|, and let the edit costs be one for all edit
operations. Show that an optimal edit operation path does not contain vertex deletion in G. (2p)
b) Show that the GED is a metric for unit edit costs. (2p)
c) Give edit cost functions such that GED is not a metric. (1p)
Exercise 7.2 – Linear programming application: Beverage production (6 Points)
A beverage-company is planning their next product-cycle with two types of beverages A and B. For the
production of one litre A three hours of machine-working-hours are needed and for product B four hours.
The number of overall available machine-working-hours is 20.000 hours.
The ingredients for the two products differ and the costs for producing one litre of A amount to 3€ and the
costs for one litre of B to 2€. The company has a budget of 4000€. Additionally, the firm gets some public
subsidies, such that producing one litre of A adds 2,25€ to the budget and one litre of B adds 1,35€.
Further, the company wants to balance the sales of the beverages, i.e., the number of produced beverages
of the two types should differ by at most a factor of 2.
The company naturally wants to maximize its profit. They have negotiated a sales price of 5€ per litre of
beverage A and 4,5€ per litre of beverage B.
a) Formulate the problem as a linear program.
b) Visualize the LP (including the objective function). Does a solution with profit 10.000€ exist?
c) What is the optimum solution and what is its objective value?
d) An improvement of the machine could increase the running-time by 2.000 hours, but it would cost
250€. Would you improve the machine or would you keep the current production plan? Justify your
answer.
Exercise 7.3 – Graph coloring ILP formulations (6 Points)
A valid k-coloring of an undirected graph G = (V,E) is a mapping f : V → {1,...,k}, such that f (v ) ̸= f (w)
for all {v,w} ∈ E. The graph (vertex) coloring problem wants to solve the question: What is the minimal
number k for which G has a k-coloring?
An integer linear program (ILP) is a linear program with the additional constraint that x ∈ Z
n
.
a) Give an ILP formulation of the graph coloring problem.
b) Give another different ILP formulation of the graph coloring problem.
c) Give bounds for the numbers of constraints and variables of the two formulations.
d) Discuss possible problems of the two formulations and make a guess which formulation works better
in practice.
Page 1 of 2
Exercise 7.4 – Weisfeiler-Leman: Connected counter example (3 Points)
The standard example in the lecture of two non-isomorhic graphs that could not be distinguished by the
1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm are the following 2-regular graphs:
Figure 1
Give an example of two non-isomorphic connected undirected graphs which can also not be distinguished
by the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm.
Hint: You only need to slightly modify the graphs in the given example.
Page 2 of 2