RHEINISCHE
FRIEDRICH-WILHELMSUNIVERSITÄT BONN
INSTITUT FÜR
INFORMATIK DER
UNIVERSITÄT BONN
Institut für Informatik
Abteilung 1
Prof. Dr. Petra Mutzel
Laura Bülte
Michael Kaibel
Charlotte Bockhorst
Exercises for
Algorithms for Data Analysis
WS 2025/26
Exercise Sheet 10
Discussion:
CW 4
Exercise 10.0 – BONUS - Recap Matchings
The next topic after graph edit distance will be algorithms for the streaming model, with a special focus
on bipartite matchings. If you haven’t encountered bipartite matchings so far, check out the definition of
matchings, alternating paths, augmenting paths and the theorem by Berge, e.g. on the Wikipedia pages for
matchings and Berge’s theorem or in Combinatorial Optimization.
Exercise 10.1 – Linear ordering problem (5 Points)
a) Prove that it suffices to exclude all the cycles of length 3 in our ILP for the LOP (see slide 30). (3p)
b) Is this also true for the LP relaxation? If we added cycle inequalities of larger size to the LP-relaxation
of the LOP, would the polytope change? (2p)
Exercise 10.2 – Acyclic subgraph and linear ordering polytopes are not integer (5 Points)
In the lecture it was discussed that for n < 6 the linear ordering polytope (LOP) is integer. The same is true
for the acyclic subgraph polytope (ASP). In this exercise you are to show that for n = 6 the LOP and ASP
are not integer.
a) Construct a graph G with 6 vertices and a fractional solution x to the relaxed ASP such that x has a
better objective value than any integer solution. (3P)
b) Construct a cost vector c for the complete directed graph with 6 vertices and a fractional solution x
to the relaxed LOP such that x has a cost lower than any integer solution. (2P)
Hint 1: In the lecture it was discussed that on a 3 Moebius ladder M (see 1) any integer solution for the
linear odering problem must have xe = 0 for at least 2 edges in M. The same is true for the acyclic subgraph
problem. Find a fractional solution x such that P
e∈M xe > 7 that stil satisfies all cycle inequalities.
1
2 3
4
5 6
Figure 1: A 3-Moebius ladder on 6 vertices
Hint 2: Consider how you can turn your acyclic subgraph problem and fractional solution from a) into a
linear ordering problem and a corresponding fractional solution.
Page 1 of 2
Hint 3: For proofs it may be easier to work with the LP formulation which contains variables xuv and xv u
(the first one discussed in the lecture). Any proof for this LP also applies to the ILP which has only one
variable per vertex pair.
Exercise 10.3 – Graph edit distance BLP formulations (7 Points)
In this exercise, we take a closer look at the BIP-F1 formulation for GED that was presented in the lecture
(see slide 36). The following table shows the costs used in the BLP formulation, and the corresponding edit
operation:
Edit operation Cost
Substitution of vertex i ∈ V
G by vertex k ∈ V
H ci ,k
Deletion of vertex i ∈ V
G ci ,ϵ
Insertion of vertex k ∈ V
H cϵ,k
Substitution of edge ij ∈ E
G by edge kl ∈ E
H cij,kl
Deletion of edge ij ∈ E
G cij,ϵ
Insertion of edge kl ∈ E
H cϵ,kl
We will proof Theorem 4:
Let G and H be graphs with V
G ≤ V
H and let (x
∗
,w∗
) be an optimal solution to BIP-F1 with value z
∗
.
Then we have GED(G,H) = z
∗
.
a) Show that x
∗
corresponds to a valid node map π, i.e., show that every vertex in G/H is either mapped
to/from exactly once, or it is deleted/inserted. Further, show that the total cost of the node edit
operations of π equals the cost incurred by x
∗
. (eq. (22) on slide 36). (2p)
b) Show that w
∗
corresponds to an edge map ρ induced by this node map, i.e., an edge ij ∈ E
G is mapped
to an edge kl ∈ E
H if and only if the set of end points are mapped to each other by π. Further, show
that the total cost of the edge edit operations of ρ equals the cost incurred by w
∗
. (eq. (23) on slide
36). (2p)
c) Let π : V
G+ϵ → V
H+ϵ be a node map between G and H with total edit cost C. Construct a feasible
solution (x,w) to BIP-F1 with cost C. (2p)
d) Using a)-c), proof Theorem 4. (1p)
Exercise 10.4 – BONUS - Feedback arc set problem (5 Points)
The Feedback Arc Set Problem (FAS) is defined as follows:
Instance: Directed graph G = (V,E).
Task: Find the smallest subset F ⊆ E that contains at least one edge of every cycle in G.
a) Explain the relation between FAS and the linear ordering problem. How can FAS be solved using
methods for LOP? (3p)
b) Now consider FAS for undirected graphs, for which the problem is solvable in polynomial time. Give
an efficient algorithm for the problem. What is the size of the solution? (2p)
Page 2 of 2