RHEINISCHE
FRIEDRICH-WILHELMS-
UNIVERSITÄT BONN
INSTITUT FÜR
INFORMATIK DER
UNIVERSITÄT BONN
Institut für Informatik
Abteilung 1
Prof. Dr. Petra Mutzel
Laura Bülte
Michael Kaibel
Charlotte Bockhorst
Exercise Sheet 9
Discussion:
CW 3
Exercises for
Algorithms for Data Analysis
WS 2025/26
This exercise sheet will be discussed in the second week after the Christmas break (January 13-16, 2026).
Exercise 9.1 – Simple Branch-and-Bound (4 Points)
Consider the following integer linear program for n∈N>0 with n odd.
min xn+1
s.t. 2·
n
xi + xn+1 = n
i =1
x ∈{0,1}n+1
a) What is an optimal solution of the LP relaxation? (1p)
b) What does the branch and bound tree for the ILP look like and how many sub-problems must be
considered if LP relaxations are solved for the calculation of lower bounds? (3p)
Exercise 9.2 – Separation of TSP cutting planes (5 Points)
The Traveling Salespersom Problem (TSP) is defined as follows.
Given: Complete undirected graph G= (V,E) with edge costs c : E→R≥0.
Question: What is the minimum cost cycle that visits each vertex exactly once?
We use the following notation for v ∈V,S⊊ V,F ⊆E :
• δ(v) := {e= {v,u}∈E|u∈V}
• δ(S) := {e= {v,u}∈E|u∈V \S,v ∈S}
• x(F) :=
e∈F xe
Consider the following LP formulation, which we want to use as the base for a cutting-plane approach to
the TSP:
min
e∈E
c(e)·xe (1)
s.t. x(δ(v)) = 2 for all v ∈V x(δ(S)) ≥ 2 for all S⊆V,∅̸= S̸= V xe ∈ [0,1] for all e∈E (2)
(3)
(4)
a) If we tried to solve this LP directly, what problem would we encounter? (1p)
b) For our cutting-plane approach, we start with the LP without sub-tour constraints (3). We then
iteratively solve the LP, find a subset S for which the subtour constraint is violated by the current
fractional solution and add this constraint to the formulation.
State the separation problem that needs to be solved in each step. Explain how it can be solved in
polynomial time. (4p)
Page 1 of 2
Exercise 9.3 – Branch-and-Cut for independent set (8 Points)
Let G = (V,E) be an undirected graph. The Maximum Independent Set (MIS) problem seeks to find a
subset S⊆V of maximum size such that no two vertices in S are connected by an edge.
a) Model the Maximum Independent Set problem as an ILP. (1p)
b) Next we want to derive constraints to enhance the model: Construct constraints based on the inter-
action between cycles in G and independent sets. (2p)
c) Argue using the constraints from (a) why only cycles of odd size are of interest in this context, i.e.,
why do the even ones not yield any new information? (1p)
d) Now, we want to introduce cutting planes using separation of the new constraint class. Given an
optimum solution of the LP relaxation of the ILP, we aim to find violated odd-cycle constraints that
are not yet added to our formulation: How can we identify violated odd-cycle constraints in polynomial
time? You may assume as a black-box that you can find an odd cycle of minimum weight (with respect
to arbitrary edge weights) in polynomial time. (2p)
e) Develop a branching strategy for solving the MIS problem. Each branching decision should fix exactly
one variable, i.e., decide whether a vertex is part of the independent set or not. Discuss your thoughts
on the following in class: (2p)
i) Which implication does fixing one vertex have on possible independent sets of the graph?
ii) What would be a good branching choice when fixing exactly one variable?
iii) What is a major drawback of branching on a single variable/vertex for the MIS problem?
Exercise 9.4 – Santa’s assignment problem (3 Points)
Santa has a problem. It is close to Christmas, his hard-working elves have prepared all the presents, but the
addresses on the presents got mixed up, and now Santa has no idea where the presents are supposed to go.
Luckily, he still has all the children’s wish-lists. We want to help him assign the presents to the children.
We are given a set of children C and a set of presents P, and for each child a preference list of a subset of
the presents. Santa’s elves have a smart way to process these preference lists into a happiness score, i.e.,
we have a function h: C×P →Z quantifying how much happiness a certain present gives a child.
Santa wants to maximize the overall happiness of the world’s children, while also making sure that every
child receives at least one present.
Formulate an Integer Linear Program that solves Santa’s problem. Since Santa does not know anything
about ILPs, explain what the objective function and the constraints in your formulation mean.
Merry X-mas!
Page 2 of 2