RHEINISCHE
FRIEDRICH-WILHELMS-
UNIVERSITÄT BONN
INSTITUT FÜR
INFORMATIK DER
UNIVERSITÄT BONN
Exercises for
Algorithms for Data Analysis
WS 2025/26
Institut für Informatik
Abteilung 1
Prof. Dr. Petra Mutzel
Laura Bülte
Michael Kaibel
Charlotte Bockhorst
Exercise Sheet 4
Discussion:
CW 47
Exercise 4.1 Pairing heaps (8 Points)
Another data structure, which realizes priority queues, are pairing heaps. They are described in the following
article: Amr Elmasry: Pairing Heaps with Costless Meld, ESA 2010, Part II, LNCS 6347, pp. 183193,
2010. You can nd this article over google scholar or on arXiv.
a) Describe the specic structure of pairing heaps and elaborate the dierences to Fibonacci heaps. (2p)
b) Describe the method consolidate. (In the arxiv version it is called clean-up.) (2p)
c) Describe the way the methods insert, decrease-key and delete-min work and state their running times.
(4p)
Exercise 4.2 Betweenness algorithms for trees (6 Points)
For an edge e ∈ E we can dene σst (e) to be the number of shortest paths from s to t that contain the
edge e. Using this we dene the undirected edge betweenness to be:
CB (e) = 1
2
s,t
σst (e)
σst
.
Let T be an undirected tree.
a) Give an algorithm that computes the edge betweenness of all edges of T in linear time and show that
it is correct. (3p)
b) Give an algorithm that computes the (vertex) betweenness of all vertices of T in linear time and show
that it is correct. (3p)
Exercise 4.3 Isomorphic invariants (6 Points)
A property P is called an isomorphic invariant (or graph invariant) if and only if given two isomorphic graphs
G and H, both graphs have the property P whenever one of the graphs has it. For example, the number of
vertices and the number of edges are isomorphic invariants.
Prove or disprove that the following properties are isomorphic invariants:
a) G has m simple circuits (cycles) of length k. (1.5p)
b) G has an Euler circuit. (1.5p)
c) G has a minimum vertex cover of size k. (1.5p)
d) G has adjacency matrix A. (1.5p)
Page 1 of 1